docs: add explanation about security-status output (SC-1552) (#2599)
canonical/ubuntu-pro-client: docs/explanations/how_to_interpret_the_security_status_command.md

# What does `security-status` do?

## Command output

The `security-status` command is used to get an overview of the packages
installed on your machine, and an overview of the security coverage for those

> packages.

Reviewer: Can't use suggestion because of the deleted line, but I think this could be changed to the following (or words to that effect):

> The `security-status` command provides an overview of all the packages installed on your machine, and the security coverage that applies to those packages.

> 

Reviewer: It always renders a bit strangely to have two headings with no text between them. I'd suggest moving the "## Command output" on line 3 to here

If you run the `pro security-status` command, the first blocks of information
you see look like:

```
2871 packages installed:
     2337 packages from Ubuntu Main/Restricted repository
     504 packages from Ubuntu Universe/Multiverse repository
     8 packages from third parties
     22 packages no longer available for download

To get more information about the packages, run
    pro security-status --help
for a list of available options.
```

Those are counts for the `apt` packages installed in the system, sorted

> between the packages in main, universe, third party packages, and packages

Reviewer: I'm still not 100% sure if main/universe/restricted are meant to be capitalised or not (I've seen both), but it would be good if we could choose which we want to go with and use only that (for consistency). Lmk whether we want to use capitalised/decapitalised and I'll highlight any that don't match.

Author: /me is sorry - you right I will go all lowercase

Author: but now I see the command output has it uppercase - and it was like that since, well, the old commands were there :/

> no longer available. You will also see a hint to run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that are no longer available. You will also see a hint to run
```

`pro security-status --help` to get more information.

> 

Reviewer: In general, before each different subsection, I'd put a subheading to aid navigation. E.g. the first one on this line, before "To get this package information...". Each of these code snippets + description seems to cover a distinct/new thing so it would help to signpost them with headers.

> To get this package information, the apt caches must be up to date. If your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get accurate package information, the `apt` caches must be up to date. If your
```

cache was not updated recently, you may see a message in the output with a hint
to update.

```
The system apt cache may be outdated. Make sure to run
    sudo apt-get update
to get the latest package information from apt.
```

If `esm-infra` is not enabled in your system, Main/Restricted packages will be
covered during the LTS period - this information is presented right after the
hints. A covered system will present this message:

```
This machine is receiving security patching for Ubuntu Main/Restricted
repository until <year>.
```

On a system where the LTS periond ended, you'll see:

```
This machine is NOT receiving security patches because the LTS period has ended
and esm-infra is not enabled.
```

> An Ubuntu Pro subscription will provide more coverage than the regular LTS. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An Ubuntu Pro subscription provides more security coverage than a standard LTS. The
```

next blocks of information are related to Ubuntu Pro itself:

```
This machine is attached to an Ubuntu Pro subscription.

Main/Restricted packages are receiving security updates from
Ubuntu Pro with 'esm-infra' enabled until 2032.

Universe/Multiverse packages are receiving security updates from
Ubuntu Pro with 'esm-apps' enabled until 2032. You have received 21 security
updates.
```

This system is already attached to Pro! It is a Jammy machine, which has

> installed some updates from esm-apps. Running the same on a Xenial system

Reviewer: ```suggestion
installed some updates from `esm-apps`. Running the same command on a Xenial system
```

without Pro enabled, the output looks like:

```
This machine is NOT attached to an Ubuntu Pro subscription.

Ubuntu Pro with 'esm-infra' enabled provides security updates for
Main/Restricted packages until 2026. There are 170 pending security updates.

Ubuntu Pro with 'esm-apps' enabled provides security updates for
Universe/Multiverse packages until 2026. There is 1 pending security update.

Try Ubuntu Pro with a free personal subscription on up to 5 machines.
Learn more at https://ubuntu.com/pro
```

> There are lots of esm-infra updates for this machine, and even an esm-apps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are lots of `esm-infra` updates for this machine, and even an `esm-apps`
```

update. The hint in the end of the output has a link to the main Pro website,

> so users can learn more about Pro and get their subscription.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
so the user can learn more about Pro and get their subscription.
```

If you are running an interim release, the output is slightly different because
there are no Ubuntu Pro services available. You will still see the package

> counts and support period though.

Author: Well the `main` packages you have installed are still covered on interim releases (for 9 months) even without Pro being there.

> counts and support period though.

Reviewer: There's still so many questions about what's covered and when that it's probably worth including (especially as the explanation is so short).

```
613 packages installed:
    601 packages from Ubuntu Main/Restricted repository
    12 packages from Ubuntu Universe/Multiverse repository

To get more information about the packages, run
    pro security-status --help
for a list of available options.

Main/Restricted packages receive updates until 1/2024.

Ubuntu Pro is not available for non-LTS releases.
```

Some flags can be passed to `security-status` to get information about coverage

> of specific package sets. As an example, look at the output of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of specific package sets. As an example, let's look at the output of
```

`pro security-status --esm-infra`:

```
442 packages installed:
    441 packages from Ubuntu Main/Restricted repository

Main/Restricted packages are receiving security updates from
Ubuntu Pro with 'esm-infra' enabled until 2026. You have received 3 security
updates. There are 160 pending security updates.

Run 'pro help esm-infra' to learn more

Installed packages with an available esm-infra update:
( ... list of packages ... )

Installed packages with an esm-infra update applied:
( ... list of packages ... )

Further installed packages covered by esm-infra:
( ... list of packages ... )

For example, run:
    apt-cache show tcpdump
to learn more about that package.
```

> Besides the support information of Main/Restricted (which Ubuntu Pro with esm-infra extends) there are list of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Besides the support information of Main/Restricted (which Ubuntu Pro with esm-infra extends) there are lists of
```

> - packages which have an installed version from the esm-infra repositories

Reviewer: I'd suggest ordering these in the same order as they appear in the output

- packages which have some updated version in esm-infra
- packages which are covered by esm-infra

You will see a similar output when running `pro security-status --esm-apps`,
but with information regarding Universe/Multiverse packages.

You can also get a list of the third-party packages installed in the system:

```
$ pro security-status --thirdparty
2871 packages installed:
     8 packages from third parties

Packages from third parties are not provided by the official Ubuntu
archive, for example packages from Personal Package Archives in Launchpad.

Packages:
( ... list of packages ... )

For example, run:
    apt-cache show <package_name>
to learn more about that package.
```

> And also a list of unavailable packages (which don't have any installation
> source anymore):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And also a list of unavailable packages (which no longer have any installation
source):
```

> Let's understand what each key means in the output of the `pro security-status`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's understand what each key means in the output of the `pro security-status --format yaml`
```

Reviewer: Since we earlier discussed the plain `pro security-status` command, I think we need to add this qualifier for the sake of clarity
